---layout: default---# History of COBOL
## Background[edit]
In the late 1950s, computer users and manufacturers were becoming concerned about the rising cost of programming. A 1959 survey had found that in any data processing installation, the programming cost US$800,000 on average and that translating programs to run on new hardware would cost $600,000. At a time when newprogramming languages were proliferating, the same survey suggested that if a common business-oriented language were used, conversion would be far cheaper and faster.[16]
On 8 April 1959,Mary K. Hawes, a computer scientist atBurroughs Corporation, called a meeting of representatives from academia, computer users, and manufacturers at theUniversity of Pennsylvaniato organize a formal meeting on common business languages.[17]Representatives includedGrace Hopper(inventor of the English-like data processing languageFLOW-MATIC),Jean SammetandSaul Gorn.[18][19]
At the April meeting, the group asked theDepartment of Defense(DoD) to sponsor an effort to create a common business language. The delegation impressed Charles A. Phillips, director of the Data System Research Staff at the DoD,[20]who thought that they "thoroughly understood" the DoD's problems. The DoD operated 225 computers, had 175 more on order and had spent over $200 million on implementing programs to run on them. Portable programs would save time, reduce costs and ease modernization.[21]
Charles Phillips agreed to sponsor the meeting and tasked the delegation with drafting the agenda.[22]
## COBOL 60[edit]
On 28 and 29 May 1959 (exactly one year after the ZürichALGOL 58meeting), a meeting was held atthe Pentagonto discuss the creation of a common programming language for business. It was attended by 41 people and was chaired by Phillips.[23]The Department of Defense was concerned about whether it could run the same data processing programs on different computers.FORTRAN, the only mainstream language at the time, lacked the features needed to write such programs.[24]
Representatives enthusiastically described a language that could work in a wide variety of environments, from banking and insurance to utilities and inventory control. They agreed unanimously that more people should be able to program and that the new language should not be restricted by the limitations of contemporary technology. A majority agreed that the language should make maximal use of English, be capable of change, be machine-independent and be easy to use, even at the expense of power.[25]
The meeting resulted in the creation of asteering committeeand short, intermediate and long-range committees. The short-range committee was given to September (three months) to produce specifications for an interim language, which would then be improved upon by the other committees.[26][27]Their official mission, however, was to identify the strengths and weaknesses of existing programming languages and did not explicitly direct them to create a new language.[24]
The deadline was met with disbelief by the short-range committee.[28]One member,Betty Holberton, described the three-month deadline as "gross optimism" and doubted that the language really would be a stopgap.[29]
The steering committee met on 4 June and agreed to name the entire activity as theCommittee on Data Systems Languages, orCODASYL, and to form an executive committee.[30]
The short-range committee members represented six computer manufacturers and three government agencies. The computer manufacturers wereBurroughs Corporation,IBM,Minneapolis-Honeywell(Honeywell Labs),RCA,Sperry Rand, andSylvania Electric Products. The government agencies were theU.S. Air Force, the Navy'sDavid Taylor Model Basin, and theNational Bureau of Standards(now the National Institute of Standards and Technology).[31]The committee was chaired byJoseph Wegsteinof the U.S. National Bureau of Standards. Work began by investigating data description, statements, existing applications and user experiences.[32]
The committee mainly examined theFLOW-MATIC,AIMACOandCOMTRANprogramming languages.[24][33]The FLOW-MATIC language was particularly influential because it had been implemented and because AIMACO was a derivative of it with only minor changes.[34][35]FLOW-MATIC's inventor, Grace Hopper, also served as a technical adviser to the committee.[28]FLOW-MATIC's major contributions to COBOL were long variable names, English words for commands and the separation of data descriptions and instructions.[36]
Hopper is sometimes called "the mother of COBOL" or "the grandmother of COBOL",[37][38][39]althoughJean Sammet, a lead designer of COBOL, said Hopper "was not the mother, creator or developer of Cobol".[40][1]
IBM's COMTRAN language, invented byBob Bemer, was regarded as a competitor to FLOW-MATIC[41][42]by a short-range committee made up of colleagues of Grace Hopper.[43]Some of its features were not incorporated into COBOL so that it would not look like IBM had dominated the design process,[26]and Jean Sammet said in 1981 that there had been a "strong anti-IBM bias" from some committee members (herself included).[44]In one case, after Roy Goldfinger, author of the COMTRAN manual and intermediate-range committee member, attended a subcommittee meeting to support his language and encourage the use of algebraic expressions, Grace Hopper sent a memo to the short-range committee reiterating Sperry Rand's efforts to create a language based on English.[45]
In 1980, Grace Hopper commented that "COBOL 60 is 95% FLOW-MATIC" and that COMTRAN had had an "extremely small" influence. Furthermore, she said that she would claim that work was influenced by both FLOW-MATIC and COMTRAN only to "keep other people happy [so they] wouldn't try to knock us out".[46]
Features from COMTRAN incorporated into COBOL included formulas,[47]thePICTUREclause,[48]an improvedIFstatement, which obviated the need forGO TOs, and a more robust file management system.[41]
The usefulness of the committee's work was subject of great debate. While some members thought the language had too many compromises and was the result ofdesign by committee, others felt it was better than the three languages examined. Some felt the language was too complex; others, too simple.[49]
Controversial features included those some considered useless or too advanced for data processing users. Such features includedBoolean expressions,formulasand tablesubscripts(indices).[50][51]Another point of controversy was whether to make keywords context-sensitive and the effect that would have on readability.[50]Although context-sensitive keywords were rejected, the approach was later used inPL/Iand partially in COBOL from 2002.[52]Little consideration was given tointeractivity, interaction withoperating systems(few existed at that time) and functions (thought of as purely mathematical and of no use in data processing).[53][54]
The specifications were presented to the executive committee on 4 September. They fell short of expectations: Joseph Wegstein noted that "it contains rough spots and requires some additions", and Bob Bemer later described them as a "hodgepodge". The subcommittee was given until December to improve it.[28]
At a mid-September meeting, the committee discussed the new language's name. Suggestions included "BUSY" (Business System), "INFOSYL" (Information System Language) and "COCOSYL" (Common Computer Systems Language).[55]It is unclear who coined the name "COBOL",[56][57]although Bob Bemer later claimed it had been his suggestion.[58][59][60]
In October, the intermediate-range committee received copies of theFACTlanguage specification created byRoy Nutt. Its features impressed the committee so much that they passed a resolution to base COBOL on it.[61]
This was a blow to the short-range committee, who had made good progress on the specification. Despite being technically superior, FACT had not been created with portability in mind or through manufacturer and user consensus. It also lacked a demonstrable implementation,[28]allowing supporters of a FLOW-MATIC-based COBOL to overturn the resolution. RCA representative Howard Bromberg also blocked FACT, so that RCA's work on a COBOL implementation would not go to waste.[62]
It soon became apparent that the committee was too large for any further progress to be made quickly. A frustrated Howard Bromberg bought a $15 tombstone with "COBOL" engraved on it and sent it to Charles Phillips to demonstrate his displeasure.[b][64][65]
A sub-committee was formed to analyze existing languages and was made up of six individuals:[24][66]
The sub-committee did most of the work creating the specification, leaving the short-range committee to review and modify their work before producing the finished specification.[24]
The specifications were approved by the executive committee on 8 January 1960, and sent to the government printing office, which printed them asCOBOL 60. The language's stated objectives were to allow efficient, portable programs to be easily written, to allow users to move to new systems with minimal effort and cost, and to be suitable for inexperienced programmers.[67]
The CODASYL Executive Committee later created the COBOL Maintenance Committee to answer questions from users and vendors and to improve and expand the specifications.[68]
During 1960, the list of manufacturers planning to build COBOL compilers grew. By September, five more manufacturers had joined CODASYL (Bendix,Control Data Corporation,General Electric(GE),National Cash RegisterandPhilco), and all represented manufacturers had announced COBOL compilers. GE and IBM planned to integrate COBOL into their own languages, GECOM and COMTRAN, respectively. In contrast,International Computers and Tabulatorsplanned to replace their language, CODEL, with COBOL.[69]
Meanwhile, RCA and Sperry Rand worked on creating COBOL compilers. The first COBOL program ran on 17 August on an RCA 501.[70]On 6 and 7 December, the same COBOL program (albeit with minor changes) ran on an RCA computer and a Remington-RandUnivaccomputer, demonstrating that compatibility could be achieved.[71]
The relative influences of which languages were used continues to this day in the recommended advisory printed in all COBOL reference manuals:
## COBOL-61 to COBOL-65[edit]
Many logical flaws were found inCOBOL 60, leading General Electric'sCharles Katzto warn that it could not be interpreted unambiguously. A reluctant short-term committee performed a total cleanup and, by March 1963, it was reported that COBOL's syntax was as definable asALGOL's, although semantic ambiguities remained.[69]
COBOL is a difficult language to write a compiler for, due to the large syntax and many optional elements within syntactic constructs as well as to the need to generate efficient code for a language with many possible data representations, implicit type conversions, and necessary set-ups for I/O operations.[74]Early COBOL compilers were primitive and slow. A 1962 US Navy evaluation found compilation speeds of 3–11 statements per minute. By mid-1964, they had increased to 11–1000 statements per minute. It was observed that increasing memory would drastically increase speed and that compilation costs varied wildly: costs per statement were between $0.23 and $18.91.[75]
In late 1962, IBM announced that COBOL would be their primary development language and that development of COMTRAN would cease.[75]
The COBOL specification was revised three times in the five years after its publication. COBOL-60 was replaced in 1961 by COBOL-61. This was then replaced by the COBOL-61 Extended specifications in 1963, which introduced the sort and report writer facilities.[76]The added facilities corrected flaws identified by Honeywell in late 1959 in a letter to the short-range committee.[70]COBOL Edition 1965 brought further clarifications to the specifications and introduced facilities for handlingmass storagefiles andtables.[77]
## COBOL-68[edit]
Efforts began to standardize COBOL to overcome incompatibilities between versions. In late 1962, both ISO and the United States of America Standards Institute (nowANSI) formed groups to create standards. ANSI producedUSA Standard COBOL X3.23in August 1968, which became the cornerstone for later versions.[78]This version was known as American National Standard (ANS) COBOL and was adopted by ISO in 1972.[79]
## COBOL-74[edit]
By 1970, COBOL had become the most widely used programming language in the world.[80]
Independently of the ANSI committee, the CODASYL Programming Language Committee was working on improving the language. They described new versions in 1968, 1969, 1970 and 1973, including changes such as new inter-program communication, debugging and file merging facilities as well as improved string-handling andlibraryinclusion features.[81]
Although CODASYL was independent of the ANSI committee, theCODASYL Journal of Developmentwas used by ANSI to identify features that were popular enough to warrant implementing.[82]The Programming Language Committee also liaised withECMAand the Japanese COBOL Standard committee.[81]
The Programming Language Committee was not well-known, however. The vice-president, William Rinehuls, complained that two-thirds of the COBOL community did not know of the committee's existence. It also lacked the funds to make public documents, such as minutes of meetings and change proposals, freely available.[83]
In 1974, ANSI published a revised version of (ANS) COBOL, containing new features such asfile organizations, theDELETEstatement[84]and thesegmentationmodule.[85]Deleted features included theNOTEstatement, theEXAMINEstatement (which was replaced byINSPECT) and the implementer-defined random access module (which was superseded by the new sequential and relative I/O modules). These made up 44 changes, which rendered existing statements incompatible with the new standard.[86]The report writer was slated to be removed from COBOL, but was reinstated before the standard was published.[87][88]ISO later adopted the updated standard in 1978.[79]
## COBOL-85[edit]
In June 1978, work began on revising COBOL-74. The proposed standard (commonly called COBOL-80) differed significantly from the previous one, causing concerns about incompatibility and conversion costs. In January 1981, Joseph T. Brophy, Senior Vice-president of Travelers Insurance, threatened to sue the standard committee because it was notupwards compatiblewith COBOL-74. Mr. Brophy described previous conversions of their 40-million-line code base as "non-productive" and a "complete waste of our programmer resources".[89]Later that year, theData Processing Management Association(DPMA) said it was "strongly opposed" to the new standard, citing "prohibitive" conversion costs and enhancements that were "forced on the user".[90][91]
During the first public review period, the committee received 2,200 responses, of which 1,700 were negative form letters.[92]Other responses were detailed analyses of the effect COBOL-80 would have on their systems; conversion costs were predicted to be at least 50 cents per line of code. Fewer than a dozen of the responses were in favor of the proposed standard.[93]
ISO TC97-SC5 installed in 1979 the international COBOL Experts Group, on initiative ofWim Ebbinkhuijsen. The group consisted of COBOL experts from many countries, including the United States. Its goal was to achieve mutual understanding and respect between ANSI and the rest of the world with regard to the need of new COBOL features. After three years, ISO changed the status of the group to a formal Working Group:WG 4 COBOL. The group took primary ownership and development of the COBOL standard, where ANSI made most of the proposals.
In 1983, the DPMA withdrew its opposition to the standard, citing the responsiveness of the committee to public concerns. In the same year, a National Bureau of Standards study concluded that the proposed standard would present few problems.[91][94]A year later,DECreleased aVAX/VMSCOBOL-80, and noted that conversion of COBOL-74 programs posed few problems. The newEVALUATEstatement and inlinePERFORMwere particularly well received and improved productivity, thanks to simplifiedcontrol flowanddebugging.[95]
The second public review drew another 1,000 (mainly negative) responses, while the last drew just 25, by which time many concerns had been addressed.[91]
In 1985, the ISO Working Group 4 accepted the then-version of the ANSI proposed standard, made several changes and set it as the new ISO standard COBOL 85. It was published in late 1985.
Sixty features were changed or deprecated and 115[96]were added, such as:[97][98]
The new standard was adopted by all national standard bodies, including ANSI.[79]
Two amendments followed in 1989 and 1993. The first amendment introduced intrinsic functions and the other provided corrections.[79]
## COBOL 2002 and object-oriented COBOL[edit]
In 1997,Gartner Groupestimated that there were a total of 200 billion lines of COBOL in existence, which ran 80% of all business programs.[c][99]
In the early 1990s, work began on adding object-orientation in the next full revision of COBOL. Object-oriented features were taken fromC++andSmalltalk.[2][3]
The initial estimate was to have this revision completed by 1997, and an ISO Committee Draft (CD) was available by 1997. Some vendors (includingMicro Focus,Fujitsu, andIBM) introduced object-oriented syntax based on drafts of the full revision. The final approved ISO standard was approved and published in late 2002.[100]
Fujitsu/GTSoftware,[101]Micro Focus introduced object-oriented COBOL compilers targeting the.NET Framework.
There were many other new features, many of which had been in theCODASYL COBOL Journal of Developmentsince 1978 and had missed the opportunity to be included in COBOL-85.[102]These other features included:[103][104]
Threecorrigendawere published for the standard: two in 2006 and one in 2009.[105]
## COBOL 2014[edit]
Between 2003 and 2009, three technical reports were produced describingobject finalization,XMLprocessing andcollection classesfor COBOL.[105]
COBOL 2002 suffered from poor support: no compilers completely supported the standard. Micro Focus found that it was due to a lack of user demand for the new features and due to the abolition of theNISTtest suite, which had been used to test compiler conformance. The standardization process was also found to be slow and under-resourced.[106]
COBOL 2014 includes the following changes:[107]
## COBOL 2023[edit]
The COBOL 2023 standard added a few new features:
There is as yet no known complete implementation of this standard.[citation needed]
## Legacy[edit]
COBOL programs are used globally in governments and businesses and are running on diverse operating systems such asz/OS,z/VSE,VME,Unix,NonStopOS,OpenVMSandWindows. In 1997, theGartner Groupreported that 80% of the world's business ran on COBOL with over 200 billion lines of code[c]and 5 billion lines more being written annually.[113]
Near the end of the 20th century, theyear 2000 problem(Y2K) was the focus of significant COBOL programming effort, sometimes by the same programmers who had designed the systems decades before. The particular level of effort required to correct COBOL code has been attributed to the large amount of business-oriented COBOL, as business applications use dates heavily, and to fixed-length data fields.[114]Some studies attribute as much as "24% of Y2K software repair costs to Cobol".[115]After the clean-up effort put into these programs for Y2K, a 2003 survey found that many remained in use.[116]The authors said that the survey data suggest "a gradual decline in the importance of COBOL in application development over the [following] 10 years unless ... integration with other languages and technologies can be adopted".[117]
In 2006 and 2012,Computerworldsurveys (of 352 readers) found that over 60% of organizations used COBOL (more thanC++andVisual Basic .NET) and that for half of those, COBOL was used for the majority of their internal software.[9][118]36% of managers said they planned to migrate from COBOL, and 25% said that they would do so if not for the expense of rewriting legacy code. Alternatively, some businesses have migrated their COBOL programs from mainframes to cheaper, faster hardware.[9]
Testimony before theHouse of Representativesin 2016 indicated that COBOL is still in use by many federal agencies.[119]Reutersreported in 2017 that 43% of banking systems still used COBOL with over 220 billion lines of COBOL code in use.[120]
By 2019, the number of COBOL programmers was shrinking fast due to retirements, leading to an impending skills gap in business and government organizations which still use mainframe systems for high-volume transaction processing. Efforts to rewrite systems in newer languages have proven expensive and problematic, as has the outsourcing of code maintenance, thus proposals to train more people in COBOL are advocated.[121]
During theCOVID-19 pandemicand the ensuing surge of unemployment, several US states reported a shortage of skilled COBOL programmers to support the legacy systems used for unemployment benefit management. Many of these systems had been in the process of conversion to more modern programming languages prior to the pandemic, but the process was put on hold.[122]Similarly, the USInternal Revenue Servicerushed to patch its COBOL-basedIndividual Master Filein order to disburse the tens of millions of payments mandated by theCoronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.[123]
